<!-- Link: https://hashnode.com/draft/64ec64299a7db7000f2d1966 -->

Most of us have been the end-users, or simply, users of all kinds of software all our lives. We use so many apps both on Phones & PC for all kinds of use cases. But have you ever wondered what happens on the opposite end of the spectrum? If you have, this blog is for you. Here, I intend to get you started with contributing to open-source projects on Github, using Git as the version control system.

## The intuition behind Git & FOSS

Imagine you want to make a simple to-do app on Android. You will start by learning a programming language like Kotlin/Java, and then you will learn the tools you need to make the app. Also, you will probably want to see a tutorial to understand how it's done. In short, you will follow a roadmap that will help you achieve your end goal of making the app. However, as long as you're the only one doing the project, you will have all your files stored locally on your computer (and you may also have a backup in some cloud storage for safekeeping).

Now let's imagine that you've already made and deployed your app on the Android App Store. But, since no app is perfect, you need to also take feedback from your users and keep improving the app that way.

**However, what if you were told that you could allow people with the relevant skills to directly contribute to your project in some way?** This is where platforms like Github & Gitlab come in. These platforms essentially allow people from anywhere in the world to contribute to your project, and help you manage & organise all those contributions in an organised and easy-to-understand manner.

## Git: The Version Control system

In addition to a platform where you can host your projects and share them with the world, you also need something that allows you to interact with your project from the local system.

> **Version Control**: Version control systems are software that help track changes made in code over time. As a developer edits code, the version control system takes a snapshot of the files. It then saves that snapshot permanently so it can be recalled later if needed.

Git is referred to as a 'version control' system. It implements version control in the form of commits and also allows us to access, use and contribute to the software repositories hosted in platforms like Github, in a structured manner. In short, it's a tool that allows us to interact with all kinds of open-source repositories from the convenience of our personal computers.

## Branches

> A branch is a section where all code that has been modified by a single developer, a particular team, or related to a single topic live.

Every repository has a **main** branch, where the production code lives. This is the version of the code that is used by anyone who wants to use the software. So it's obvious that this code needs to remain bug-free and we can't allow everyone to push anything they want in this branch.

So what if someone else wants to contribute to the repository? In that case, they fork the repository & create their branch (or use a branch specifically designed for this purpose) to push their modified code into. This system of branching maintains isolation between multiple instances of modified code and allows the project maintainers to only commit code that is deemed fit for production use, to the **main branch** of the repository.

## Issues

> An issue is an umbrella term used to describe bugs, feature additions or potential enhancements that can be made to improve the software. Issues typically have several tags associated with them, which describe their status, priority, etc. as per the requirements of the project.

Creating & describing issues is the first step taken even before the actual code modification starts. It's a way to inform the project maintainers about any current bugs the codebase has, and also any potential improvements that can be made to enhance the functionality of the software.

Here, you have the option to either work on an existing issue or create a new one. This is like the feedback system that you get on the App Stores for your app. But, in addition to just creating an issue and calling it a day, you can also work on one by creating what's known as a **pull request**, which we will learn about in the next section.

## Pull Requests

* **Pull Request**: This is one of the most important terms used in these platforms. A pull request comes into the picture after the developer has already made the necessary modifications. Creating a PR is a means to 'request' the project maintainers to merge that code to the main branch of the repository.
    

This is the place where you describe what changes you made in the code, what your intentions are, and what **issue** it's meant to solve. After you've created a pull request, you may have to further collaborate with the project maintainers and implement any necessary changes requested by them. Once everything is complete, the maintainers will merge your modifications with the main branch of the repository.