<!-- Link: https://hashnode.com/draft/64ec7748ce91e7000f30bdfa -->

Most of us have been the end-users, or simply, users of all kinds of software all our lives. We use so many apps both on Phones & PC for all kinds of use cases. But have you ever wondered what happens on the opposite end of the spectrum? If you have, this blog is for you. Here, I intend to give you a basic idea about how the open-source community & platforms work, and where you fit in as a developer or end-user.

## The intuition behind Git & FOSS

Imagine you want to make a simple to-do app on Android. You will start by learning a programming language like Kotlin/Java, and then you will learn the tools you need to make the app. Also, you will probably want to see a tutorial to understand how it's done. In short, you will follow a roadmap that will help you achieve your end goal of making the app. However, as long as you're the only one doing the project, you will have all your files stored locally on your computer (and you may also have a backup in some cloud storage for safekeeping).

Now let's imagine that you've already made and deployed your app on the Android App Store. But, since no app is perfect, you need to also take feedback from your users and keep improving the app that way.

**However, what if you were told that you could allow people with the relevant skills to directly contribute to your project in some way?** This is where platforms like Github & Gitlab come in. These platforms essentially allow people from anywhere in the world to contribute to your project, and help you manage & organise all those contributions in an organised and easy-to-understand manner.

## Git: The Version Control system

In addition to a platform where you can host your projects and share them with the world, you also need something that allows you to interact with your project from the local system.

> **Version Control**: Version control systems are software that help track changes made in code over time. As a developer edits code, the version control system takes a snapshot of the files. It then saves that snapshot permanently so it can be recalled later if needed.

Git is referred to as a 'version control' system. It implements version control in the form of commits and also allows us to access, use and contribute to the software repositories hosted in platforms like Github, in a structured manner. In short, it's a tool that allows us to interact with all kinds of open-source repositories from the convenience of our personal computers.

## Branches

> A branch is a section where all code that has been modified by a single developer, a particular team, or related to a single topic live.

Every repository has a **main** branch, where the production code lives. This is the version of the code that is used by anyone who wants to use the software. So it's obvious that this code needs to remain bug-free and we can't allow everyone to push anything they want in this branch.

So what if someone else wants to contribute to the repository? In that case, they fork the repository & create their branch (or use a branch specifically designed for this purpose) to push their modified code into. This system of branching maintains isolation between multiple instances of modified code and allows the project maintainers to only commit code that is deemed fit for production use, to the **main branch** of the repository.

## Issues

> An issue is an umbrella term used to describe bugs, feature additions or potential enhancements that can be made to improve the software. Issues typically have several tags associated with them, which describe their status, priority, etc. as per the requirements of the project.

Creating & describing issues is the first step taken even before the actual code modification starts. It's a way to inform the project maintainers about any current bugs the codebase has, and also any potential improvements that can be made to enhance the functionality of the software.

Here, you have the option to either work on an existing issue or create a new one. This is like the feedback system that you get on the App Stores for your app. But, in addition to just creating an issue and calling it a day, you can also work on one by creating what's known as a **pull request**, which we will learn about in the next section.

## Pull Requests

> You will find the term '**pull request**' being thrown around a lot on these open-source platforms. A pull request is what comes into the picture just after the developer has already made the necessary modifications. Creating a PR is a means to '**request**' the project maintainers to merge that code to the main branch of the repository.

This is the place where you describe what changes you made in the code, what your intentions are, and what **issue** it's meant to solve. After you've created a pull request, you may have to further collaborate with the project maintainers and implement any necessary changes requested by them. Once everything is complete, the maintainers will merge your modifications with the main branch of the repository.

A pull request is usually linked to an issue it's meant to fix. If you created a pull request, it doesn't mean you have to do all the work yourself. Multiple people can work together to solve a particular issue, but **each of these people has to create their own pull request to do so**. This is mainly done to prevent merge conflicts between all the different versions of the codebase.

## Discussions

Many platforms now include a Discussion section to discuss about anything and everything! You can think of this as a place to talk about anything related to the particular project repository. Things like discussing new feature additions, getting the end user's opinion on a particular change, getting the developer community's ideas about how a particular framework migration should take place, etc. can all be done in this section.

## The Big Picture

Lastly, I aim to highlight all the things you can do to be a part of the open-source community.

### As an aspiring Developer

Regardless of whether you have very little or a lot of coding experience, contributing to open source can prove to be highly beneficial for you. The SDLC is pretty fascinating at first glance, and contributing to open source is one of the easiest ways to familiarise yourself with the entire process.

* **You will need to read and understand all the code that is already present in the particular repository**. This will help you understand which parts of the code are important, which parts are not, the file structure, and how the logic flows around the entire codebase. This knowledge and experience are very beneficial especially if you want to do anything remotely similar to developing software in your career as an IT professional.
    
* **You will need to have a basic idea of how the Software Development Life Cycle works.** While most open-source projects may not be as popular as mainstream software, the basic idea is still going to be implemented in them. Ideas such as planning for a new feature, preparing a roadmap, slowly adding the feature to the existing codebase, testing the code thoroughly (using automated/manual checks) to ensure that the existing code is still functional, and finally deploying the improved version to the main branch, etc. are all things you can get a hands-on experience in. What's more, you can even become one of the codebase maintainers yourself if you want to!
    

### As an end-user

What if you don't have any interest in going the development route but instead just want to use Free and Open Source software? Well, you can do that too.

* You can use open-source app stores like [F-Droid](https://f-droid.org/) to download FOSS Android apps safely and securely. You will find a variety of apps here, and they even provide dedicated apps that you can install to keep your FOSS apps up-to-date.
    
* In most cases, you can find instructions on how to install & use a piece of software right on the main (README) page of the repository. This page will include instructions on how to install it, the dependencies needed, the available configuration options, etc. You will also get a link to the official documentation if the project happens to have one.